Practical No. 8 – Implementation of Autoencoder
Aim:

To implement an Autoencoder using PyTorch for image reconstruction and feature extraction on the MNIST dataset.

Theory:

An Autoencoder is a type of unsupervised neural network that learns to compress (encode) the input data into a smaller representation and then reconstruct (decode) it back to the original form.

It has two main parts:

Encoder: Compresses input data into a lower-dimensional space (latent space).

Decoder: Reconstructs the original data from the encoded representation.

Working of Autoencoder:

Input → Encoder → Latent Vector → Decoder → Output

The network is trained to minimize the reconstruction error between the input and output.

Mathematically,

Loss
=
∣
∣
𝑋
−
𝑋
^
∣
∣
2
Loss=∣∣X−
X
^
∣∣
2

where

𝑋
X = Original input

𝑋
^
X
^
 = Reconstructed output

Purpose of Autoencoders:

Dimensionality reduction (similar to PCA)

Noise removal (Denoising Autoencoders)

Feature extraction

Image compression and reconstruction

Types of Autoencoders:

Basic Autoencoder – Simple encoder-decoder structure.

Denoising Autoencoder – Learns to remove noise from data.

Sparse Autoencoder – Forces sparsity in hidden layer for better feature learning.

Variational Autoencoder (VAE) – Used for generating new data (like GANs).

Algorithm:

1.Import Libraries:
-Import torch, torch.nn, torch.optim, torchvision, matplotlib.

2.Load Dataset:

-Use the MNIST dataset.

-Normalize pixel values between 0 and 1.

-Create DataLoader for training and testing.

3.Define Autoencoder Architecture:

-Encoder: Fully connected layers that reduce input dimension.

-Decoder: Fully connected layers that reconstruct the input.
Example:

class Autoencoder(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self):
        super().__init__()
        self.encoder = nn.Sequential(
            nn.Linear(784, 128),
            nn.ReLU(),
            nn.Linear(128, 64)
        )
        self.decoder = nn.Sequential(
            nn.Linear(64, 128),
            nn.ReLU(),
            nn.Linear(128, 784),
            nn.Sigmoid()
        )
    def forward(self, x):
        x = x.view(-1, 784)
        encoded = self.encoder(x)
        decoded = self.decoder(encoded)
        return decoded


4.Define Loss and Optimizer:

-Loss Function: Mean Squared Error (MSE)

-Optimizer: Adam or SGD

5.Training Loop:

-Forward pass → Reconstruct output.

-Compute reconstruction loss (MSE).

-Backpropagate and update weights.

-Repeat for multiple epochs.

6.Testing:

-Pass test images through the trained model.

-Compare original vs reconstructed images.

7.Visualization:

-Display original and reconstructed images side by side.


Result:

The autoencoder successfully learned to reconstruct MNIST digit images.

Reconstructed images are similar to the original input.

Loss decreases with each epoch.

Example Output:

Epoch [20/20], Loss: 0.015
Reconstructed images closely match original inputs.

Conclusion:

The Autoencoder model efficiently learned compressed representations of the MNIST dataset.

It can be used for image compression, denoising, or feature extraction.

Autoencoders are a fundamental concept in unsupervised learning and form the basis of advanced models like Variational Autoencoders (VAE) and GANs.

Viva / Oral Questions and Answers:

Q1: What is an Autoencoder?
A: It is a type of neural network that learns to encode data into a lower-dimensional space and reconstruct it back.

Q2: What are the main parts of an Autoencoder?
A: Encoder and Decoder.

Q3: What is the purpose of the encoder?
A: To compress or encode input data into a smaller feature representation.

Q4: What is the purpose of the decoder?
A: To reconstruct the original data from the encoded representation.

Q5: What type of learning is used in Autoencoders?
A: Unsupervised learning.

Q6: What loss function is used?
A: Mean Squared Error (MSE) loss between input and reconstructed output.

Q7: What activation functions are used?
A: ReLU for hidden layers, Sigmoid for the output layer.

Q8: What optimizer is used?
A: Adam optimizer.

Q9: What dataset is used in this experiment?
A: MNIST handwritten digits dataset.

Q10: Mention one application of Autoencoders.
A: Denoising, feature extraction, or image compression.